---
title: The Roles on a Data Team
main_image: work_travel22/previews/24.jpeg
layout: post
category: articles
tags: [data, startups, jobs, technology, software engineering, programming]
description: I was recently on a panel that opened with the question "is data engineering dead?" My answer was a very clear "no."
---

I was recently on a panel that opened with the question "is data engineering dead?" My answer was a very clear "no."

Tools come and go, and the collection of skills associated to titles continuously change with them, but further specialization within a discipline is the opposite of that discipline dying.

Companies today understand they should invest early in specialized data teams, but it is not uncommon for startup founders, even those with significant experience, to have limited understanding of the various data roles and how they differ. Even data professionals themselves can get confused because the lines are fuzzy. This often leads to disagreement on who to hire when, or lack of clarity in how a new teammate could contribute to the success of the organization.

In this blog post, I will explore the various roles within a data team, and how they work together to drive broader goals. A solid data team is made up of members with diverging expertise. A few rough categories are listed below; however, the important thing is to have team members with each of these skills, regardless of their actual titles. The same role might have a different label at different companies.

* **Data Engineers** (DE) are the keepers of your company's data warehouse, data lake, or the trendy data location of your choice. DEs process events logged from product workflows, loading production data into long term storage for downstream analysis and historical recordkeeping. They might also be tasked with ingesting data from external sources, whether using off-the-shelf SaaS like Fivetran or Stitch, or setting up custom extraction processes. DEs might build assets which are core to the user experience, but generally are seen as part of a support function. DEs often manage pipeline orchestration and task dependencies using tools like Airflow or Dagster. While DEs can work with real-time processing tools like Flink, Kafka, or AWS SQS, early stage companies commonly shy away from these due to their added complexity – even at data centric companies, their work tends to happens "offline," being batched on a schedule and behind the scenes. Historically, DEs also defined core data models and data transformations, which is where their role starts to blend into the next one in our list…


* **Analytics Engineers** (AE) expose and maintain curated interfaces to evolving datasets, abstracting away complexity from upstream producers and downstream users. They are the most recent addition to the data team roster. This role was popularized by dbt Labs to apply software engineering practices (version control, testing, CI/CD, etc) to analysis code. AEs act as the interface between engineering teams and downstream data stakeholders, and are responsible for coordinating with internal users to define metrics and tables. While they often assist in ad-hoc analyses or one-off queries, their main focus should be to ensure data consistency and maintainability much more than enabling any one process or dashboard. AEs have an architectural role, helping in schema evolution and change management by keeping tabs on platform changes and the evolving requests of data users. In an ideal world, AEs also build tools, write documentation, and set up guardrails for their team, allowing for downstream users to self-serve data transformations and contribute directly to the codebase. Their main stakeholders tend to be analysts and technically savvy business users.


* **Data Analysts** are tasked with identifying opportunities for the business based on data. They also hold the vaguest title in the data team. At some companies, analysts don't venture far past Excel spreadsheets and basic chart building, while elsewhere they might perform deep insights work, build critical dashboards and reports, run regressions, or forecast trends on historical data. Much of their work can be one-off tasks, but they spend most of their time setting up recurring analyses in business intelligence (BI) tools or notebooks for broad consumption. It is common to find further specialization into business or product analytics, where domain knowledge can make a difference beyond their core analytical skills. A product analyst might dive into Amplitude or Segment to understand how a new feature changed user behavior, while a business analyst might work with Netsuite and Google Analytics data to track down ROI patterns in spend. Analysts tend to be at the front line fielding questions from data users, and spend a significant portion of their time untangling and cleaning messy data.


* **Machine Learning Engineers** (MLE) are responsible for owning the full lifecycle (creation, deployment, iteration) of statistical models. They work with stakeholders to nail down success metrics and set up automated processes to retrain systems based on those targets as new data rolls in. MLEs are also a more recent addition to Data teams, after our industry realized that we need a translation layer to get research-grade models to run well in production. Given the end to end nature of their role, they work cross-functionally with team members across the organization to understand the downstream impact of ML models and bring those insights back into the next modeling iterations. They are often also tasked with designing and implementing processes to generate ground truth validation datasets, establishing methodologies to avoid data leakage and to ensure data transformations in service of ML are repeatable and well-tested. Frameworks like Metaflow and mlflow and tools like Weights and Biases or AWS's Sagemaker are popular with MLEs, but the market seems a lot more fragmented when compared to the tools available for other data team members, which shows there's still a lot of opportunity in this space.


* **Data Scientists** (DS) are another group with very vague titles. While at larger corporations this might be a research role designing new algorithms, at most companies a DS will apply well-known statistical methods to the proprietary data problems at hand. Here, I'll focus on the latter kind of DS, who is responsible for building and evaluating models with off-the-shelf algorithms. Similar to analysts, much of the work a DS does is simply deep data cleaning. I differentiate DSs from analysts in that the main outcome of their work are models, as opposed to dashboards and reports. Pretty much every company that's complex enough eventually hires DSs to help them understand their business metrics, modeling customer acquisition costs (CAC), lifetime value (LTV), or conversion rates. In some companies data science also enables the product itself. Those are arguably more exciting DS roles, building core technology like the matching engines of ridesharing apps, the computer vision capabilities in self-driving cars, or the recommendation engine of your favorite online stores. Great data science teams build feedback loops for their DS models, conducting and analyzing online experiments, or working with user research in other kinds of offline validation.


* **Data Infrastructure/Platform Engineers** (DI) are responsible for standing up and managing databases, clusters, and other basic infrastructure. They govern and maintain data access rules and permissioning, as well as monitor the performance of live production systems (telemetry) and optimize data warehouse performance. They often work closely with security and compliance teams, particularly at companies that handle sensitive data such as PII. Early on, some of the systems that infrastructure engineers own can be managed by the backend or full stack engineers building the product, but as the organization grows it becomes important to build out the role as a separate function, or at least have a DevOps engineer dedicated to this area.

Once again, the titles above are just a few rough job categories, and neither mutually exclusive nor collectively exhaustive. Larger teams might need more specialization, with folks focusing on data governance, quality, ontology, visualization, etc. Newer roles like MLOps and prompt engineering are starting to appear thanks to good branding and marketing from tool providers.

Titles change as problems and tools evolve. Well-functioning data teams empower leaders to make better data-driven decisions that spur growth and make better use of resources. That isn't changing. Companies will continue investing in data trends, but only with the right people in the room and covering these core skillsets will stakeholders be able handle the ever-increasing demands of data-driven decision making.
