about.md, before:

---
layout: page
title: About
---


## Hi, I'm Avy!


<div class="preview">
      <img src="{{ site.image_path }}computin.jpg" alt="avy"/>
</div>
<br>
This is me circa 1995. Not much has changed.

The photo above was taken in San José, Costa Rica, where I was born and raised. I've lived in the US for the past ~{{'now' | date: "%s" | minus : 1316044800 | divided_by: 31557600 | floor}} years, first in Chicago, studying engineering and economics at Northwestern University, and now in San Francisco, where I work as a software engineer on Apple's Siri Search team.

Way too much of my free time is spent reading, both online and off. This blog is the place where I compile my favorites for others to indulge (including future me). It's way easier for me to take a good photo than to write a good essay, but I'm working on improving both. I'm interested in complexity, emerging behavior, and the systems that humans build to tame the two.

To learn about how this site is produced, check out the [colophon](/colophon).

I'd love to [hear from you](/contact). If you'd like to hear from me (not too often!) sign up below:
{% include subscribe_form.html %}

Commit message:

add book pipe to the about

about.md, after:

---
layout: page
title: About
---


## Hi, I'm Avy!


<div class="preview">
      <img src="{{ site.image_path }}computin.jpg" alt="avy"/>
</div>
<br>
This is me circa 1995. Not much has changed.

The photo above was taken in San José, Costa Rica, where I was born and raised. I've lived in the US for the past ~{{'now' | date: "%s" | minus : 1316044800 | divided_by: 31557600 | floor}} years, first in Chicago, studying engineering and economics at Northwestern University, and now in San Francisco, where I work as a software engineer on Apple's Siri Search team.

Way too much of my free time is spent reading, both online and off. This blog is the place where I compile my favorites for others to indulge (including future me). For a full list of what I'm reading, check out my [book pipeline](/book_pipe). It's way easier for me to take a good photo than to write a good essay, but I'm working on improving both. I'm interested in complexity, emerging behavior, and the systems that humans build to tame the two.

To learn about how this site is produced, check out the [colophon](/colophon).

I'd love to [hear from you](/contact). If you'd like to hear from me (not too often!) sign up below:
{% include subscribe_form.html %}
