---
title: Links - September 3, 2024
layout: links
category: links
articles:
  - title: The Bottleneck Theory of Everything
    author: Travers Nisbet
    url: https://entangle.substack.com/p/the-bottleneck-theory-of-everything
    note: My training as an industrial engineer means I think about bottlenecks all the time. If we were better at figuring out limiting factors, we'd be better off.
    tags:
        - Complexity
        - Engineering
  - title: Understanding GPT tokenizers
    author: Simon Willison
    url: https://simonwillison.net/2023/Jun/8/gpt-tokenizers/
    note: A fun explainer on the underlying mechanics of LLMs forcusing on GPT tokenizers. They don't actually predict the next word, they predict the next token. This will help you visualize it.
    tags:
        - NLP
        - LLMs
        - Artificial Intelligence
  - title: 'iNaturalist observations: "locals" and "tourists"'
    author: Logan Williams
    source: tracks and traces
    url: https://exclav.es/2023/03/22/inaturalist-observations-locals-and-tourists/
    note: Visualizing who hangs out in which parts of which cities, based on iNaturalist data. Funny that SF and Costa Rica are two of the places highlighted.
    tags:
        - Data visualization
  - title: The Marginal Revolution is Dead
    author:  Arnold Kling
    note: Economics education is all about thinking at the margin, but Kling argues that what drives prices in the real world is more about the structural. Overhead, fixed costs, and other factors are more important than the marginal cost of production.
    url: https://arnoldkling.substack.com/p/the-marginal-revolution-is-dead
    tags:
        - economics
        - organizational behavior
  - title: Accidentally Load Bearing
    author: Jeff Kaufman
    note: Chesterton's Fence meets the slow creep of history. The original reason for an object might no longer be relevant, but it might now be serving a new purpose.
    url: https://www.jefftk.com/p/accidentally-load-bearing
    tags:
        - organizational behavior
  - title: Everything I, an Italian, thought I knew about Italian food is wrong
    author: Marianna Giusti
    source: The Financial Times
    note: On the invention of what we think of as "the classics" of Italian cuisine, and questioning authenticity. Tradition is actually successful innovation. The article is paywalled, but you can access it through the archive link below.
    url: https://archive.is/20240730091049/https://www.ft.com/content/6ac009d5-dbfd-4a86-839e-28bb44b2b64c
    tags:
        - food
        - culture
  - title: "Colleges Spend Like There's No Tomorrow. 'These Places Are Just Devouring Money.'"
    author: Melissa Korn, Andrea Fuller, and Jennifer S. Forsyth
    source: The Wall Street Journal
    url: https://www.wsj.com/articles/state-university-tuition-increase-spending-41a58100
    note: There's a very real cost in universities competing on amenities and facilities instead of education quality. That cost is borne partially by students via tuition hikes, but in the case of public institutions also by the states that fund these universities. This article highlights the University of Kentucky, Penn State, and the University of Oklahoma as examples of heavy spending on new buildings, sports programs, and administrative layers. The lack of budgetary oversight leads to unsustainable growth and financial instability that will ultimately be covered by the tax payer. Insane that universities have videogame competition theaters, or Tempur-Pedic mattresses, granite countertops, and in-unit washer-dryers in the dorms. 
    tags:
        - Education
        - Economics
  - title: Carrot Problems
    author: Jehan Azad
    url: https://www.atvbt.com/the-carrot-problem/
    note: "Azad describes \"Carrot Problems\" as those when people achieve success through secret or unethical means, and publicly credit something else for the outcome. This can lead outsiders to waste time on ineffective strategies, chasing false promises. The term comes from a WWII propaganda campaign claiming pilots developed night vision by eating carrots, masking the real reason: onboard radar."
    tags:
        - organizational behavior
        - history
  - title: Learning Iconic Scenes with Differential Privacy
    author: Apple Machine Learning Research
    url: https://machinelearning.apple.com/research/scenes-differential-privacy
    note: A semi-accessible piece on how Apple improved the selection of key photos for Memories and location-based photo rankings in Photos in iOS 17. This feature uses crowd-learned data, powered by differential privacy, to highlight iconic scenes in user photos while preserving privacy. 
    tags:
        - Machine Learning
        - Differential Privacy
        - Photography
  - title: They're Made out of Meat
    author: Terry Bisson
    url: https://www.mit.edu/people/dpolicar/writing/prose/text/thinkingMeat.html
    note: A classic short story about aliens discovering humans, and the absurdity of our existence. It's a fun read, and a good reminder of how strange life is. If you prefer to listen, there's a great [This American Life episode](https://www.thisamericanlife.org/803/greetings-people-of-earth/act-two-17) that features this story.
    tags:
        - sci-fi
        - fiction
  - title: The ‘Georgists’ Are Out There, and They Want to Tax Your Land
    author: Conor Dougherty
    source: The New York Times
    note: Maybe I'm too much of an optimist, but the fact that a flavor of Georgism has found a spot in office in a city ready for experimentation is a good sign. The article highlights how Detroit Mayor Mike Duggan aims to combat property speculation by proposing his version of a land-value tax (LVT), raising taxes on vacant land while lowering them on occupied buildings. The article also touches on the history of Georgism, and how it's been a fringe idea for a long time. It's been almost a year since this article was published, and I'm curious to see if things are moving yet.
    url: https://www.nytimes.com/2023/11/12/business/georgism-land-tax-housing.html
    tags:
        - economics
        - urban
        - politics

  - title: The Dead Children We Must See
    author: Jay Caspian Kang
    source: The New Yorker
    url: https://www.newyorker.com/news/our-columnists/the-dead-children-we-must-see
    note: Maybe, graphic images would push us to better policy. Caspian Kang compares the sanitized media portrayal of the Gulf War with the raw, graphic images coming out of the war in Gaza. The author also makes an analogy to school shootings in the U.S., where the horror is often hidden in media, focusing on peripheral details instead of the victims. The piece questions whether showing graphic images, particularly of dead children, would provoke action. The reluctance to display these images reflects a desire to keep an emotional distance. Harsh images can cause real outrage, and maybe that's a first step to solve the underlying problems.
    tags:
        - culture
        - politics
        - history
  - title: Not a real engineer
    author: Richard Marmorstein
    url: https://twitchard.github.io/posts/2019-05-29-not-a-real-engineer.html
    note: A short poem on not getting the job.
    tags:
        - software engineering
        - programming
        - interviews
  - title: Christmas Is a Sad Season for the Poor (1949)
    author: John Cheever
    source: The New Yorker
    url: https://www.newyorker.com/magazine/1949/12/24/christmas-is-a-sad-season-for-the-poor-john-cheever
    note: A short story about a lonely elevator operator in NYC. He spends Christmas Day working while the wealthy residents of his building sleep or celebrate. As he faces the residents, he highlights his poverty and loneliness to evoke sympathy, resulting in an outpouring of gifts. Overwhelmed, he redistributes the excess to his landlady's children, sparking a brief chain of charitable acts. The story highlights the transient and often superficial nature of holiday generosity.
    tags:
        - culture
        - fiction
        - class
  - title: Children Risk Their Lives Building America’s Roofs
    author: Hannah Dreier, Brent McDonald, Nicole Salazar, Annie Correal and Carson Kessler
    source: The New York Times
    url: https://www.nytimes.com/interactive/2023/12/14/us/roofing-children-immigrants.html
    note: The article describes the tragic circumstances surrounding child labor in the U.S. roofing industry, focusing on the stories of young migrant workers. These children, often undocumented and vulnerable, are hired by subcontractors who find them cheap and easy to exploit. Enforcement of child labor laws is weak, with few inspections and minimal fines. The Department of Labor struggles to keep up, claiming to have to cover 15,000 work sites per investigator. The piece highlights one case where a teenager was severely injured from a roofing accident, leaving him disabled, and his family without income or compensation. The images are harrowing. Despite the dangers, many child laborers continue to work in roofing, driven by economic need and the hope of sending money back to their families.
    tags:
        - immigration
        - labor
        - politics
        - economics
  - title: Nations don't get rich by plundering other nations
    author: Noah Smith
    note: The idea of nations getting rich by exploiting others is a myth. Instead, Noah suggests that nations get rich through technology, and by developing their own economies and trading with other nations. He points out that despite imperialism and exploitation in XIX century Europe or the U.S., the people in these countries were extremely poor by modern standards. They didn't achieve modern wealth until the advent of industrial production and modern science. Wealth is generated internally through a country's own efforts and policies.
    url: https://www.noahpinion.blog/p/nations-dont-get-rich-by-plundering
    tags:
        - economics
        - history
        - politics
  - title: Fixing Macs Door to Door
    author: Mat Duggan
    url: https://matduggan.com/fixing-macs-door-to-door/
    note: A short autobiographical story recounting Duggan's experience graduating college during the Great Recession, struggling to find a job, and eventually working repairing Apple devices in Chicago. He talks about the unusual circumstances that came from visiting his eccentric clients' homes, from repairing a Mac for a 9/11 conspiracy theorist, to working in wealthy clients' homes where he was treated as invisible, and hiding under a desk to avoid interacting with Oprah while swapping a hard drive at HARPO Studios. A fun read on the oddities of life and the satisfaction of solving problems.
    tags:
        - apple
        - technology
        - work
  - title: An app can be a home-cooked meal
    author: Robin Sloan
    note: On how Sloan created a simple, private messaging app called BoopSnoop for their family. Designed to share photos and videos without distractions, and in perpetual beta, the app emphasizes personal connection. The author reflects on the idea that coding, when freed from professional demands, can be a deeply personal and rewarding activity, much like cooking for loved ones. This is directly and literally related to Maggie Appleton's idea of [home-cooked and barefoot developers](https://maggieappleton.com/home-cooked-software), but honestly I do not know which of the two I heard about first. 
    url: https://www.robinsloan.com/notes/home-cooked-app/
    tags:
        - technology
        - software engineering
        - programming
        - culture
  - title: GPT in 500 lines of SQL
    author:  Alex Bolenok 
    url: https://explainextended.com/2023/12/31/happy-new-year-15/
    note: What it says on the tin. Bolenok implements a generative language model like GPT in SQL. The post is a mix of technical explanation and a playful experiment, ultimately demonstrating the complexities of using SQL for deep learning tasks. The author jumps through hoops to tokenize text, embed it into vectors, and perform feedforward transformations on it across multiple layers to select the final tokens and respond to a prompt. The result is a simple model that can generate text, albeit with limited capabilities. The post is a fun exercise in creativity.
    tags:
        - LLMs
        - SQL
        - programming
        - Artificial Intelligence
  - title: Collision Detection
    author: Jeffrey Thompson
    url: https://www.jeffreythompson.org/collision-detection/index.php
    note: Sharing this more as a novelty than as a "you should read this." Described as a book, Thompson's site is a collection of tutorials on collision detection in games, covering topics like 2D and 3D collision detection, raycasting, and physics simulations. The tutorials are well-illustrated and easy to follow, making them accessible to beginners and experienced developers alike. I find the mechanics of collision detection and physics in games fun, and the visualizations are great.
    tags:
        - programming
        - physics
        - simulation
        - tutorial
  - title: "The open-source AI revolution hasn’t happened yet!"
    author: Amjad Masad
    source: Twitter
    url: https://twitter.com/amasad/status/1747666962749284468
    note: In which Replit's CEO points out that true open-source LLMs "where everything is open from the codebase to the data pipeline" don't exist yet, and represent a real opportunity. Fun to consider some of the paths this could take, particularly through federated learning to overcome high compute costs. The original idea behind Together AI and the analogy to SETI@Home make me think this is not only possible, but happening.
    tags:
        - Artificial Intelligence
        - open-source
  - title: On high-wage jobs
    author: Chris Dillow
    source: Stumbling and Mumbling
    url: https://stumblingandmumbling.typepad.com/stumbling_and_mumbling/2024/01/on-high-wage-jobs.html
    note: High-wage jobs aren't always a sign of economic progress, that's affirming the consequent. Dillow argues that economic success can happen without creating new high-paying jobs and that some high-wage jobs result from inefficiencies or negative circumstances rather than real value creation. Examples include jobs in protection services or tax advising, which arise from social problems or loopholes, rather than contributing to overall economic improvement. High-wage jobs should result from a thriving economy, not be mistaken as the cause of one.
    tags:
        - economics
        - labor
        - politics
  - title: Heaven or High Water
    author: Sarah Miller
    source: Popula
    note: For years, I've been saying that the government shouldn't subsidize living in places that will become uninhabitable due to climate change. This article makes an adjacent argument, focusing on Miami real estate. The author visits flood prone areas of Miami Beach where rising sea levels are a major concern. Despite the tangible impact of climate change, luxury real estate thrives, with agents downplaying risks and emphasizing short-term fixes like pumps and raised roads. There is a clear disconnect between the looming threat and the market's optimism. Without the absurd distortion that subsidized insurance injects into the system, the market would likely be more rational. When the water rises, homeowners and tax payers will be left holding the bag.
    url: https://popula.com/2019/04/02/heaven-or-high-water/
    tags:
        - urban
        - climate change
        - miami
  - title: This is a teenager
    author: Alvin Chang
    source: The Pudding
    url: https://pudding.cool/2024/03/teenagers/
    note: A data-driven interactive story that explores the diverse experiences and challenges of growing up in different corners of the U.S. Chang illustrates how factors like race, geography, socio-economic status, and gender shape the lives of teenagers in different ways. The article highlights the disparity in opportunities and obstacles that different groups of teenagers encounter, aiming to give readers a more nuanced understanding of the USian teenage experience.
    tags:
        - data visualization
        - culture
  - title: Exploring Hacker News by mapping and analyzing 40 million posts and comments for fun
    author: Wilson Lin
    url: https://blog.wilsonl.in/hackerverse/
    note: One of the best end-to-end projects with LLMs I have seen. Lin scrapes and analyzes HN data, using embedding models to create an interactive map of HN's content and users. The blog post details the challenges of data crawling, cloud infra, and monitoring the full data pipeline as he iterated on it. The fact that the whole thing is open source makes it especially cool.
    tags:
        - culture
        - data visualization
        - llms
  - title: It's an age of marvels
    author: Mark Dominus 
    note: In which Dominus converses with Benjamin Franklin to see what he thinks about how things have changed since 1790. What's striking is to think of which incremental improvements would have been obvious to him, and which are simply mindblowing. Much of what we take for granted today that would be considered magic in the past. From Wikipedia, to GPS, to trains, fabrics and CAT scans.
    url: https://blog.plover.com/tech/its-an-age-of-marvels.html
    tags:
        - technology
        - history
  - title: Building AI products
    author: Benedict Evans
    note: Evans is probably the thinker I am most aligned with on AI. He argues that building AI products is hard because you need to understand the problem you're solving, the data you have, and the limitations of the model. Building mass-market products around technology that gets things _wrong_ is a challenge, but it's also an opportunity. The key is to understand what "wrong" means and how it can be useful, which are product questions. Throwing AI at a problem doesn't solve it, you need to understand the problem you're solving first.
    url: https://www.ben-evans.com/benedictevans/2024/6/8/building-ai-products
    tags:
        - artificial Intelligence
        - software engineering
        - llms
  - title: Seeing Like A Network
    author: Rohit Krishnan
    source: Strange Loop Canon
    url: https://www.strangeloopcanon.com/p/seeing-like-a-network
    note: Playing off of James C. Scott, Krishnan argues that our hyperconnected modern life leads to cultural homogenization. The essay explores how dense connectivity fosters echo chambers, accelerates the diffusion of ideas, and makes our culture less resilient to targeted narratives. The result is a paradoxical cultural stagnation despite the abundance of information. Krishnan suggests that the solution might be creating "cultural islands" where information spreads more slowly, allowing for deeper innovation and diversity. It's not easy to be a node in a super-dense network.
    tags:
        - technology
        - culture
  - title: On the origins of DS_store
    author: Arno Gourdol
    note: The story of the infamous file that ends up in your email attachments and manual S3 uploads. Recounting the history of the rewrite from scratch of Finder for OS X. The API that Gourdol was building was never fully released, but pieces of it still pop out for Mac users, sometimes in annoying ways.
    url: https://www.arno.org/on-the-origins-of-ds-store
    tags:
        - technology
        - history
        - software engineering
  - title: "Let's stop counting centuries"
    source: Dynomight
    url: https://dynomight.net/centuries/
    note: An argument for more precise writing. Between the off-by-one confusion caused by one-indexing (i.e., the twentieth century being the 1900s) the ambiguity of decade referencing (are the 90s, the 1990s or the 1890s?) the author pushes us to just write out the years.
    tags:
        - culture
        - history
  - title: Finding near-duplicates with Jaccard similarity and MinHash
    author:  Nelson Elhage
    source: Made of Bugs
    url: https://blog.nelhage.com/post/fuzzy-dedup/
    note: A walkthrough of how fuzzy deduplication works. The alogrithm uses Jaccard similarity and Minhash to identify documents that are nearly identical, such as different versions of a webpage. I've worked extensively on comparing named entities, but had never thought of the "longer context" version of the same problem. Elhage explains how this technique was used for dataset prep in the GPT-3 paper to reduce the input dataset size.
    tags:
        - software engineering
        - algorithms
  - title: "Building and scaling Notion’s data lake"
    author: XZ Tie, Nathan Louie, Thomas Chow, Darin Im, Abhishek Modi, Wendy Jiao
    source: Notion
    url: https://www.notion.so/blog/building-and-scaling-notions-data-lake
    note: A piece describing how Notion migrated out of Fivetran and Snowflake to build their own data lake on AWS. The article details the challenges of scaling their data infrastructure to handle massive user growth with their quirky "block" architecture, which produced unusually update-heavy workloads. Their new system prioritizes incremental data ingestion over full snapshots. The new infrastructure improved data ingestion speed, reduced costs, and supported use cases like ML features, search, and denormalized data processing. The article sparked some drama in the data engineering community because it made it seem like Fivetran was not up to the task, but the reality is that Notion's use case is very specific and not representative of the general use case for the tool.
    tags:
        - technology
        - data engineering
  - title: "PySkyWiFi: completely free, unbelievably stupid wi-fi on long-haul flights"
    author: Robert Heaton
    url: https://robertheaton.com/pyskywifi/
    note: A software eng on a plane discovers a way to access the internet for free by exploiting a hole in the airline's firewall via their airmiles account. Heaton starts with sending and receiving a byte, iterates his way to a simple instant messaging system, and eventually creates "PySkyWiFi," a tool that uses the airmiles account's name field to tunnel HTTP requests and responses, effectively granting internet access. He uses this makeshift internet connection to load a webpage, despite the slow and convoluted process. The project is a clever hack and is full of humorous commentary on the lengths one might go to avoid paying for in-flight Wi-Fi.
    tags:
        - technology
        - software engineering
  - title: Synthesizer for thought
    author: Linus Lee 
    url: https://thesephist.com/posts/synth/
    note: Super interesting exploration on new UX concepts enabled by LLMs by making an analogy first to music then to optics. The author explores how we can use LLMs to create a new kind of writing tool that helps us think and communicate better.
    tags:
        - llms
        - software engineering
        - data
  - title: Is Sleep Training Harmful?
    author: Tom Vaillant
    source: The Pudding
    url: https://pudding.cool/2024/07/sleep-training/
    note: An interactive visualization on the research behind sleep training, and the misinformation of this parenting technique. The TLDR is that there's no evidence that sleep training is harmful, and it can actually be beneficial for both parents and children.
    tags:
        - data visualization
        - parenting
        - culture
        - science
  - title: "The Kindle: Reinventing the Book"
    author: Cedric Chin
    source: Commoncog
    url: https://commoncog.com/c/cases/inventing-kindle/
    note: A case study on the development of Amazon's Kindle e-reader, covering its early competitors and its eventual impact on the publishing industry. Chin explores the Kindle's design, the challenges of creating a new product category, and the Kindle's role in Amazon's broader strategy.  He credits Amazon's success to their decisions to offer wireless book downloads via Whispernet, the early bet on the e-ink display, and the extensive digital bookstore.
    tags:
        - amazon
        - technology
        - business
  - title: A Visual Guide to Quantization
    author: Maarten Grootendorst
    url: https://newsletter.maartengrootendorst.com/p/a-visual-guide-to-quantization
    note: A deep dive on one of the core concepts that make LLMs work efficiently in industrial settings, and work at all in consumer hardware. Grootendorst explains quantization, the process of converting continuous values into discrete ones, and how it's used in machine learning to reduce the size of models. The article covers the basics of quantization, its impact on model size and performance, and the trade-offs involved in choosing the right quantization strategy. The visualizations are awesome, helping the reader understand the concept. The essay's quality is top-notch, so I'm hoping to read the book that Grootendorst is writing with Jay Alammar when it comes out.
    tags:
        - llms
        - technology
        - software engineering
  - title: Algorithms we develop software by
    author: Grant Slatton
    url: https://grantslatton.com/software-pathfinding
    note: A note on software development heuristics. The author argues one should start working on a feature each day, and if it's not done by day's end, you should delete it and start fresh the next day, retaining only unit tests. If on a second try we don't get it, we should do some refactoring before returning to it. He compares the methodology to other heuristics like "write everything twice," which suggests that repetition helps reinforce knowledge and identify better patterns, so we end up with better code. Another comparison is made to the "gun to the head" heuristic, which forces engineers to be creative under extreme time constraints, often leading to more efficient plans. The author reflects on these techniques as forms of pathfinding in problem-solving, likening them to search algorithms, which can help us become better engineers.
    tags:
        - technology
        - software engineering
  - title: "Thoughts on the FOMC's Monetary Policy Strategy Review: Part 1"
    author: Cecchetti & Schoenholtz
    source: Money and Banking
    url: https://www.moneyandbanking.com/commentary/2024/8/26/thoughts-on-the-fomcs-monetary-policy-strategy-review-part-1
    note: A critique of the Fed's recent strategy, which shifted from preemptive to patient policy, emphasizing the asymmetry of the strategy as a key issue that introduces inflation bias. The authors suggest that the flexible average inflation-targeting (FAIT) framework is inconsistent with maintaining long-run price stability, in part because it does not require patience when inflation is above target, and only when below. This asymmetry in the approach (responding more aggressively to undershoots than to overshoots) allows price level increases to become permanent. The authors recommend the Federal Reserve reexamine its strategy to reduce this bias and enhance the credibility of its policies.
    tags:
        - economics
        - banking
        - politics
  - title: Half Shorn Sheep
    author: Cary Wolinsky
    url: https://www.carywolinskyphotographs.com/half-shorn-sheep
    note: I ran into this image on a software engineering blog post, and looked up the photographer. I ended up enjoying the story of the photograph more than the blog post itself. Wolinsky tells us about how he set out to capture a picture of a sheep with half its wool sheared off for a National Geographic article. It turned out to be a complicated and lengthy process. After a failed first attempt on a trip to New Zealand, he arranged to document the shearing of 100 Merino sheep in Australia. The final photo successfully appeared in National Geographic.
    tags:
        - photography
  - title: The Geography of Unequal Recovery
    author: Ben Casselman and Ella Koeze
    source: The New York Times
    url: https://www.nytimes.com/interactive/2024/08/27/business/economy/jobs-election-county.html?unlocked_article_code=1.GU4.SwEO.iN7ReSttCVi_
    note: An interactive visualization of job gains and losses in the U.S. since the start of the pandemic. The article highlights the uneven recovery across the country, with some areas experiencing significant job growth while others continue to struggle. The visualization allows users to explore the data by region, industry, and demographics, providing a detailed look at the economic impact of the pandemic. The piece reports that "San Francisco and several of its wealthy neighbors, for example, have yet to regain all the jobs they lost in the pandemic." However, digging a bit deeper shows a leading indicator for a different story... Information technology jobs are 20% up in SF since 2019.
    tags:
        - politics
        - economics
        - labor
        - data visualization
  - title: Did your car witness a crime? Police may be coming for your Tesla
    author: Rachel Swan
    source: The San Francisco Chronicle
    url: https://www.sfchronicle.com/crime/article/tesla-sentry-mode-police-evidence-19731000.php
    note: According to the Chronicle, police departments are targeting Tesla owners for their cars' potential to capture crimes on video. The piece tells of how cops in Oakland are hitting Tesla-owners with warrants for "Sentry Mode" footage, giving the example of a Canadian tourist who prevented his Tesla from being towed by offering the video voluntarily after it was suspected of recording a homicide. This practice reflects a broader trend in mass surveilance as part of policing. I feel pretty divided about this.
    tags:
        - technology
        - San Francisco
  - title: Moderation in Social Networks
    author: Albert Wenger
    source: Continuations
    url: https://continuations.com/post/760337152873807872/moderation-in-social-networks
    note: A short piece on how social media moderation debates are flawed, driven by government control and platform profit motives. Unsurprisingly, Albert proposes decentralized solutions that ensure transparency. He points out that user bans should be difficult, opting instead for client side moderation that users can choose, and ensuring transparency in content removal policies from the networks themselves. Doubling down on his full-API access ideas, he also pushes for more "Community Notes"-style systems. In this world, platforms would be held accountable for their recommendation algorithms, but not for the content they host, balancing free speech with societal stability.
    tags:
        - technology
        - social networks
  - title: Classifying all of the pdfs on the internet
    author: Santiago Pedroza
    note: A fun project by an undergrad classifying a massive dataset of PDFs (from the SafeDocs corpus). They start with a large dataset from Common Crawl and generate labels using few-shot prompting with an LLM. After trying various models and approaches, they found that XGBoost, trained on embeddings, outperformed deep learning models. Who would have guessed?
    url: https://snats.xyz/pages/articles/classifying_a_bunch_of_pdfs.html
    tags:
        - llms
        - data visualization
        - software engineering
  - title: "Zelda: Tones of the Kingdom (Podcast)"
    source: Twenty Thousand Hertz
    url: https://www.20k.org/episodes/zeldatones
    note: A podcast episode on the sound design of the Legend of Zelda series. It explores the iconic sounds of the games, from the original 8-bit music to the orchestral scores of later titles. It also features interviews with the composers and sound designers behind the series, discussing the creative process and the impact of the music on the games' atmosphere.
    tags:
        - podcasts
        - music
        - games
  - title: How far can you jump from a swing?
    author: Alex Molas
    note: Using math and physics to model the maximum distance a person can jump from a swing using a simplified model involving a rigid dumbbell swing. They analyze various factors like the angle and timing of the jump, ultimately concluding that the maximum distance a person could achieve is around two meters, given the parameters of their model. Obviously useless, but fun.
    url: https://www.alexmolas.com/2023/08/18/how-far-can-you-jump.html
    tags:
        - physics
        - mathematics
  - title: The Wubi Effect (Podcast)
    source: Radiolab
    url: https://radiolab.org/podcast/wubi-effect-2308
    note: On keyboard design and how it affects language, including some really crazy stuff on emergent behavior paired with nationalist drive to homogenize language via technology. The episode discusses the Wubi method, a Chinese input system that uses the shape of characters to input text, and how it shaped Chinese perspective of computers and technoloy as it evolved in the last few decades.
    tags:
        - podcasts
  - title: "We're Redefining What It Means to Be a 'No Sabo' Kid"
    author: Jacqueline Delgadillo
    source: Refinery29
    url: https://www.refinery29.com/en-us/2022/05/10971837/no-sabo-kid-meaning-new-definition
    note: "This piece introduced me to the trend of people of Latino descent who don't know, or barely speak Spanish, and celebrate it. I have mixed feelings about this. I identify with \"ni de aquí, ni de allá,\" but if you claim a culture as \"yours\" you should aim to learn the language. Some people are building programs to help others in their community learn and level up in Spanish, like the _Spanish Sin Pena_ crew mentioned [here](https://www.nbcnews.com/news/latino/latino-no-sabo-kids-push-back-spanish-language-shaming-rcna105170). The thing about identity is that it isn't \"in your own terms.\" It's about belonging, and being accepted by others from that group.\n\nGranted: I barely speak German, and only know a few words of Polish. My first language is Spanish. Who am I to judge? I am sad I can't speak those, and yes, a bit ashamed. But I don't claim those as my culture, either! That's a better reaction than \"push back on shaming\" or \"be proud you don't know it.\"\n\nThis piece states that \"Not speaking a language properly, or at all, doesn’t make someone less Latinx.\" But you know what? It does. Speaking Spanish would make you closer to the core of that group. Costa Ricans refer to Jews as \"Polacos\" because of the immigration wave that took my grandparents there. CRans refer to me as \"Polish,\" yet no Pole would recognize me as one of \"them.\" If I spoke Polish that could be different, but I don't care to be Polish so I never learned it.\n\nIdentity is multi-faceted, fuzzy, and made up. Things that are made up can still matter. Embrace the fact that you're neither U.S.ian nor Latino - be your own thing. But if you want to be something, know that it's on _that_ group to embrace you, too, not just the other way around."
    tags:
        - culture
        - identity
        - language
  - title: Taxing unrealized capital gains is a terrible idea
    author: Tyler Cowen
    source: Marginal Revolution
    url: https://marginalrevolution.com/marginalrevolution/2024/09/taxing-unrealized-capital-gains-is-a-terrible-idea.html
    note: Terrible idea, indeed. Why would anyone want to start a venture backed company with this setup? Financing innovation is already hard, why make it harder?
    tags:
        - economics
        - politics 
        - taxes
  - title: Taxing Unrealized Capital Gains and Interest Rate Policy
    author: Alex Tabarrok
    source: Marginal Revolution
    url: https://marginalrevolution.com/marginalrevolution/2024/09/taxing-unrealized-capital-gains-and-interest-rate-policy.html
    note: "An even simpler take than Cowen's above.\n\n

        `P = D/r`\n\n

        `stock price = Dividend/discount rate`\n\n

        You want to tax changes in `D`, not `r`!"
    tags:
        - economics
        - politics
        - taxes
  - title: The Case for Housing Deregulation
    author: Bryan Caplan
    source: The New York Times
    url: https://www.nytimes.com/interactive/2024/07/11/opinion/housing-deregulation-panacea-policy.html?unlocked_article_code=1.6U0.CYba.rmQPP9YEmznU
    note: On the YIMBY movement as a panacea policy. Caplan hits many problems with a single solution, from fertility, to inequality, and the environment, all while improving the standard of living. Caplan is right. 
    tags:
        - economics
        - housing
        - politics
        - urban
  - title: The Divine Economy
    author: Mark Koyama
    url: https://www.markkoyama.com/p/the-divine-economy
    note: "A review of Paul Seabright's latest book, _The Divine Economy_. Koyama applauds the book for being accessible for a general audience while still offering insight for scholars. It explores religion through an economic lens, likening religions to platforms like Facebook or Amazon. Seabright builds on the club goods model, which explains why stricter religious organizations often thrive, by adding that religion involves identity and the supernatural, making religious communities more robust and long-lasting. The book also looks into the origins of religious belief, linking them to human evolution and narrative structures, and discusses the political economy of religion, highlighting the risks of religious entanglement with political power. Finally, Seabright revisits the secularization hypothesis, noting that while religiosity declines in some regions, it remains resilient globally.\n\n
    
    Seabright's Company of Strangers was one of the first books I read on economics for pure pleasure, and I'm excited to see how his thinking has evolved now that he's tackling this adjacent thesis."
    tags:
        - economics
        - religion
        - books
  - title: Name SF Streets
    author: Chris Arvin
    url: https://carvin.github.io/sf-street-names/
    note: I spent an ungodly number of hours trying to complete this. The game is a map-based quiz that asks you to name the streets of San Francisco. I don't remember my high score, so I guess it's time to try again.
    tags:
        - games
        - San Francisco
---
For the third year in a row, trying to get back on track.
